You're listening to radio lab from New York public radio, public radio,
W and y.
C. N. N. P. R.
I'm Jad Abumrad and I am Robert Krulwich and this is radio season three.
And let me start with a story. Okay. 1893 and anthropologist friends,
Bill eyes goes to the woods of British Columbia.
He has a giant wax cylinder recorder with him and he records this Guy
[inaudible].
Uh,
and who, who is this?
This gentleman is an Indian from the [inaudible] tribe and his name will told
his [inaudible].
[inaudible].
Well, Kessel I was pronounced the caseloads, I don't know.
I'm not quite sure how it would be pronounced with [inaudible].
[inaudible]
Daniel Mormon, he's an anthropologist.
He's written a lot about Kessel because it's a neat story and it goes like this.
The young castle, it begins as a sketch.
Debbie was skeptical about the activities of the shame and he thought they were
tricking people in some way. The Shaman or the village healers. Very,
very powerful man. They were scary man.
And he sees them doing these dramatic healing rituals.
He thought they were full of it and so he decided to go undercover one day.
Kessel approaches some of the Shaman and asks if he can apprentice with them.
Yeah,
there's three or four of them taken about it to the woods or doors to a clearing
or something. I'm like, tell him a bunch of things. I, they taught him the songs
[inaudible]
he learned that stuff and eventually after he'd gained their trust a little,
they taught him their best trick of a trick that's widespread in the world of
shamanism. Will you find variations on it all over the world?
Usually what you do, they told them, get some feathers,
some down feathers and just tuck it in your cheek record.
Just stick it in your mouth secretly so that nobody knew that it was there.
Then during the ritual,
let's say the patient is there and they're on the ground.
Maybe their chest hurts. You lean down,
literally get down in the cure mouth on the patient's chest and suck and here's
the last thing. While you're sucking,
you bite the inside of your cheek to get some blood in there which mixes with
the feathers. Then at the pivotal point you throw your head back in,
cough out the feathers
which were now bloody and nasty,
so you end up with this bit of bloody down in the palm of your hand,
which you would then say is the disease which you have sucked out of.
The body of the patient.
Kessel had learned all this and thought I knew it, those
liars.
The problem was that part of the obligation of his apprenticeship was that
whenever anybody asked, he had to go and treat them for free.
That was sort of part of the deal of being an apprentice and somebody from a
famous family called him to come and a treat.
A daughter who was sick,
very sick according to the written account and so he went to see this family,
any treated the girl and he went through with the songs that he's saying
and he did the feather trick which he knew was false.
He put feathers in his mouth bit.
The inside of the chief pretended the sub cost the whole thing out,
and Lo and behold, she was healed. She was fine. She was fine. She's fine. Yeah,
it was. It was a great success. Wow. And what did he think? Well, he, he,
he clearly indicates a kind of ambiguity.
He knows that he was tricking her, but he also knows that she's better
not convinced. Kessler tries to trick again and again and again.
And every time he does it, it works. So at the end of the story,
he decides to become a healer.
Does that mean that he ends up believing in the lie that he set out to disprove?
I think that he realizes that truth and lies are not that fundamentally
different as we might think they are
today on radio lab. We look at that,
the true healing power of lies, which she,
in medicine we call the placebo effect. No, no, we don't Lamey no, we don't.
It's actually called [inaudible] who calls it that? It was Latin scholars.
I think it's a Latin word. [inaudible] originally.
Let word why you call it the placebo effect.
I'm going to try and figure out how it works.
And then I would tell some stories,
including one about a dramatically dressed gentleman.
He dressed entirely in purple and maybe it was lilac who used a placebo effect
to make the lady's fuel wheel good.
That's all coming up on radio lab.
[inaudible]
Steve [inaudible] documented it,
eh? Yes, I am. February two.
[inaudible]
we had a little trouble with the phone connection for reseal.
Benedetti is a doctor at the Turin Medical Center in Italy and he's one of the
most expert experts on the placebo effect. Better. Yeah. Now I can hear you.
Yeah. So we thought we'd start with him.
He's been studying the placebo effect for about 15 years. Yes.
I got too interested in the placebo effect because, uh,
I realize that sometimes the placebo group gets much better than,
uh, the active treatment group.
Much, much better.
Yeah. Sometimes. Sometimes
for what kind of stuff? Well, he saw it first in pain.
Hey [inaudible]
pain trials. Oh, and then he saw it in depression, depression,
antidepressants. Right. And then digestion immune response.
All of these places where placebos were doing things, they just, yeah,
we're not supposed to.
Yeah. It's really amazing. Particularly for Sam conditions like
this one's a little surprising Parkinson's disease.
Since the Z series neurological disorder, people with Parkinson's have shakes,
they have tremors.
Dr Benedetti treats a lot of these folks and in the really bad cases,
the only treatment that really seems to work at all is surgery.
So these patients,
you open up the patient's skull and implant a little stimulator deep into their
brain,
deep into the brain in two brain regions.
Essentially what that does it hot wires, the
parts of the brain that aren't working. And when you do that,
you turn the stimulator on, the shakes go away. It's a real treat. Yes.
So we can switch the stimulator on or off and the patient doesn't know that the
stimulator is on or off.
And that is where the trickery comes in. And one experiment,
he stood in front of his patient with the stimulator and said,
now we are going to switch your stimulator on
except you didn't [inaudible].
No, of course. Of course. It is a sham turning.
He only pretended to turn it on, but that's the weird thing.
It didn't matter pretending to turn it on work just as well as turning it on for
real. The tremors disappeared. Really?
He even has a video of this where he's with a Parkinson's patient and he says
those words,
no, we are going to switch your stimulator on [inaudible]
which is a lie by the way. Yeah,
but it doesn't matter because what you see on the video screen is a shaking hand
go completely [inaudible].
Yeah, that's correct.
In a few seconds you see that the Riza dramatic improvement in motor
performance, even though the, the stimulator is still off
just from words and this is an equivalency. The lie is as good as the medicine
[inaudible]
for awhile. What do you mean for a while coming out of the gate?
A placebo seems to be 100% as effective as say a real Parkinson's drug.
Gotcha.
The plaster only about 25% do duration of Dr Drunk.
Ah, still it's just words. My words are cheap. Yeah. You're just cheaper than
wow.
Overstatement 25% that is so different from 100% I never said it was 100% yes.
I didn't roll the tape back. And what's wrong with you?
The fact that it happens at all, that words, that's all we're talking about.
Words can be as effective as surgery. Doesn't that one,
doesn't that intrigue you that you want to know how that works? Yes,
actually I do. How does it work? We have no idea,
but for the first time we can see it.
See what we'll see it in action. See the placebo effect in action. Oh, testing.
Testing. Dr Benedetti referred us to a guy. Actually right here.
Any of your yard, probably. You have a token with the Tar Wagga? No.
Should we? Yes, totally. [inaudible] yeah. Hey, how are you?
[inaudible] he's a very good new imager. We should introduce yourself. Okay.
I'm Troy [inaudible].
I'm assistant professor of Psychology at Columbia University and here's what
tour wig or does he put subjects in?
The [inaudible] brain scanner puts a hot pad on their arm like I'm doing to you
right now, so that's very, yeah. Great. We'll give them these pulses of heat
and then he'll give you some pain relief. Green.
This creamier cream, yes that we tell you is lie. Can you say,
this is going to be really effective? This is going to block pain.
Take away the pain. Really, it's just fascinating,
but you don't know that I'm having a hard time playing this role. In any case,
right? As you're putting on this fake cream and feeling better,
having a placebo effect, in other words, he takes a picture of your brain,
so I have many things I can show you. Come on until I show it to him. He does.
He shows me one on his computer. It's very pretty woo.
Now we have a brain in front of us, right?
A brain scan of a person right in the middle of being placebo,
meaning that they've just been given the placebo cream and now they're expecting
to feel better. Those expectations, placebo expectations, first of all,
they seem to start here in your forehead like I'm on the sides of your forehead,
above your temples. When you believe that you're going to feel better.
That belief seems to live kind of near your temples,
but then once that belief is there, it seems to turn on turn on this,
this other part, the midbrain, he points to it on the screen.
It's a little nugget deep in the center of the brain and what's important about
this area is that it's one of the major centers for the production of opioids in
the brain. Oh, opioids like opium. Yes. Yeah. Right.
Like opium. Opium as in
[inaudible].
Jack, what the greatest painkiller known to man there.
It was inside our heads in a strike. Use Weird by the way,
that that stuff actually is inside our heads. I can't get over that. That,
that these illicit substances are actually inside us. Right?
We know there's kind of a neat story about that and here is where tore blows my
mind right out my face as he explains it.
Every drug out there in the world, every single one,
even the ones you see on TV or in a sense already inside our heads,
your brain must have its own internal chemicals.
The only reason those drugs work he says is because our brain has receptors for
them and why would it have those receptors?
Because it can already make them inhouse every pharmacological agent or drug
that there is.
You know there is a chemical that's produced by your own brain that essentially
does that thing
where it's like an internal pharmacy in there that's docked full of drugs.
Right. And we just have to figure out how to unlock it.
We have a of Tava as you said, we can turn the pharmacy,
but we don't know why. Sometimes for you does not work.
What? What does that mean? Well,
what it means is that the placebo effect though it can be incredibly powerful
[inaudible] it's rarely consistent.
It's hard to predict who's going to get a placebo effect under what
circumstances.
But just imagine if we could figure this out and we can have all the drugs we
ever need without those nasty side.
Oh yes, absolutely. Yes.
We are working a lot with drug companies in this direction
with Dr Benedetti he's looking at now,
which could be huge for patients with chronic pain, right. Is to take
I toxic drug like morphine,
gradually replace it with a placebo substitute.
So say on Monday he would give you some morphine and then on Tuesday slip in a
placebo
and you'd give motion to gay on Wednesday and the placebos on Thursday and so
forth. In the longer run that you can have a reduction of morphine by 50%
Aha. And perhaps one day, I'm sorry, I can't contain my enthusiasm.
We won't need drugs at all.
Maybe one day we'll have a little box that I can plug directly into my midbrain
and I can just spend all day hitting the joy button. Jolene joy,
joy
[inaudible].
Hello. Sorry about that too. Well,
while we're waiting for your glorious drug soaked future,
you can do it much more simply by simply telling a story.
I'll tell you a story about telling stories. How about that?
I have no idea what you're talking about, right? Well, let me start with,
it's a story I learned from Daniel car, Daniel B car, m d a.
He told me about a guy who's really the father of placebo research.
His name is Henry Henry.
On the banks on angst on [inaudible]. Annexed is his original name, German.
As Dr Carl will tell you which given the poor quality of my German,
I would roughly scan as meaning anti anxiety or perhaps anti pain.
This may be one of those cases with a name shapes the man.
It may well be,
it may well be because even though he ends up changing his name to beat. Sure.
Henry knows Beecher.
He does go into medicine to become a doctor and then during World War II he
joined the army as a doctor and found himself,
did the great battle of Anzio when the Americans landed in Nazi Europe and he
was right there
on the beach. Well, let's, we're flying.
Soldiers were being killed and some were being wounded.
Sergeant [inaudible] and sins. Beecher was the doctor.
It was his job to treat them. That's correct.
The treatment at that time for pain as it still is nowadays was morphine.
One problem though,
features division was cut off from supplies and reinforcements and he began to
run low on morphine. He had to figure out which soldiers needed it the most.
And he's,
he's talking to them and he's asking him that how much pain they're actually
having. And this is Scott Podolsky, who's a doctor and his star.
And he would go up to these patients and see them soldier.
Yes. As you lie there, as you lie there,
are you having any of you having any pain, quote unquote. So imagine Jed,
you're a soldier,
you're lying there with shrapnels stuck in your guns or severe injuries and you
haven't had any morphine for at least seven hours previously. Yeah. Seven hours.
So what would you say, what would I say? Well, um, I'd say,
give me some more freedom in pain. What you want to know? Something.
The striking finding was that in 75% of them they'd say, no, no,
no doc, I'm okay. I don't need any morphine right now.
Three quarters of them said that, wow,
this didn't make a whole lot of sense to be true because he knew about pain
before the war. He ran a clinic, Boston.
So he would see people with bullet injuries and gut injuries. More or less.
Yeah, the same kind of injuries you saw on the battlefield, but back in Boston,
doc, they really hurt. Did I have anyone? Morphine please. Nurse.
For some dreams, reasons has Daniel car,
the intensity of the pain associated with being shot was lower in the
battlefield than in civilian life. What could explain that? Yeah,
maybe soldiers are just, they're tough guys. They don't. They suck it up.
They don't. Well, no, no context context. That was Beatriz.
Very simple explanation. Context, context,
meaning that the pain that you feel when you're hit by a bullet,
it's not just about the bullet,
it's just as much about the story that comes with the bullet.
So consider these two different stories. Story number one,
you are a soldier and you've been shot
as the Bullitt pastors to you. The first thing you think is, Oh man,
I'm shot. The second thing you think is, wait a second, I'm alive.
If I can be evacuated from here, I'll have a period of recuperation.
They'll take me to a hospital, there'll be nurses there.
I may get a medal and a pension or bonus. I'll certainly be acclaimed.
They'll send me home, throw me a parade.
I'll be a hero.
Now consider the civilian story this time you're a regular guy,
civilian in Boston. Maybe you own a shock kit. Can I help you sir? Pick up.
Give me your money. God, no,
and you've been shot as the bullet passes to you this time,
the thoughts flashing to your head have nothing to do with glory. That's right.
Instead you think, yeah, I'm alive, but what's going to happen to me now?
You wouldn't get a medal. You were in trouble.
Am I going to pay the doctor bills going to be out of commission,
but I'll lose my job? How do I pay the rent?
And if your family was depending upon you, they suffered.
Nothing good is going to come up. This one bullet,
two very different stories and it's the difference in the stories to Dr.
Be true. That explains the difference in the experience of pain.
Those stories you're saying or are somehow filtering the pain even before it's
felt here,
that even as the bullet enters the skin right away or within seconds thereafter,
you spin yourself a story about what's going to happen to you next.
Not Consciously,
but way down deep in your head and the story you tell that makes all the
difference.
Scientists currently view our whole identity as something that we construct one
fraction of a second to another.
You are the unfolding of an ongoing narrative,
but it's not just a narrative in words. It's a narrative that involves touch,
color, odors.
We use all those inputs to generate the next frame from the last four
[inaudible].
That's true. Let me talk for a second about color. He just mentioned color,
right? Daniel Mormon. Yeah. Okay.
Tell me something really interesting about color and pills.
Cool colored pills,
blue pills or purple pills as placebos make better sleeping tablets than yellow
or red pills, which tend to wake people up. That's been, that's been shown.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. There's a, okay, take two pills that are the same.
It says color, one blue,
call it the other red and the people that take the blue pill will sleep longer
or they will sleep better than people who took the red. But this has been shown,
he says all over the world except, and here's the cool part. Yeah.
Except in Italy, Italy, him in Italy,
blue sleeping tablets of the paradoxical effect of being sleep inducing for
women but not for men. What, how does that work? Well, I'm not really sure,
but uh,
but my speculation is that the Italian national football team is called
[inaudible], which is blue.
And so what blue evokes in an Italian man is the World Cup and soccer and
screaming and hollering again.
[inaudible]
and it's hardly something that's like
you guys by contrast, Hulu for Italian women is the color of the virgin.
Ah, the original does of course always presented in blue.
And the virgin is a very comforting and protective figure for women in Italian
culture.
[inaudible]
language and meaning are, are the most crucial dimensions of our lives.
this is Radiolab.
I'm Chad up and Rod Robert Krulwich and I will continue in a moment.